Arthritis is the swelling and tenderness of one or more of your joints. The main symptoms of arthritis are joint pain and stiffness, which typically worsen with age.

Arthritis is very common but is not well understood.

Different types of arthritis exist, each with different causes including wear and tear, infections and underlying diseases.

There are over 100 types of arthritis. The most common types of arthritis are osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis.

Osteoarthritis is the most common type of arthritis. When the cartilage – the slick, cushioning surface on the ends of bones – wears away, bone rubs against bone, causing pain, swelling and stiffness. Over time, joints can lose strength and pain may become chronic. Risk factors include excess weight, family history, age and previous injury (an anterior cruciate ligament, or ACL, tear, for example). 

Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic inflammatory disorder that can affect more than just your joints. In some people, the condition also can damage a wide variety of body systems, including the skin, eyes, lungs, heart and blood vessels.

The symptoms of arthritis usually develop over time, but they may also appear suddenly. Arthritis is most commonly seen in adults over the age of 65, but it can also develop in children, teens, and younger adults. Arthritis is more common in women than men and in people who are overweight.

Diagnosis:
• X-rays
• Blood Tests
• MRI
• CT ScansArthritis treatment focuses on relieving symptoms and improving joint function. You may need to try several different treatments, or combinations of treatments, before you determine what works best for you.

Medications
The medications used to treat arthritis vary depending on the type of arthritis. Commonly used arthritis medications include:

Analgesics. These medications help reduce pain, but have no effect on inflammation.

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs). NSAIDs reduce both pain and inflammation. Over-the-counter NSAIDs include ibuprofen and naproxen sodium. Oral NSAIDs can cause stomach irritation, and some may increase your risk of heart attack or stroke.

Disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs). Often used to treat rheumatoid arthritis, DMARDs slow or stop your immune system from attacking your joints.

Therapy
Physical therapy can be helpful for some types of arthritis. Exercises can improve range of motion and strengthen the muscles surrounding joints. In some cases, splints or braces may be warranted.

Surgery

If conservative measures don't help, your doctor may suggest surgery, such as:

• Joint repair : In some instances, joint surfaces can be smoothed or realigned to reduce pain and improve function. These types of procedures can often be performed arthroscopically — through small incisions over the joint.

• Joint replacement : This procedure removes your damaged joint and replaces it with an artificial one. Joints most commonly replaced are hips and knees.

• Joint fusion : This procedure is more often used for smaller joints, such as those in the wrist, ankle and fingers. It removes the ends of the two bones in the joint and then locks those ends together until they heal into one rigid unit.