Glaucoma is a group of eye conditions that damage the optic nerve, which is vital to good vision. This damage is often caused by an abnormally high pressure in the eye.

It can occur at any age but is more common in older adults.

Glaucoma is the result of damage to the optic nerve. As this nerve gradually deteriorates, blind spots develop in your visual field.

This nerve damage is usually related to increased pressure in the eye.

Elevated eye pressure is due to a buildup of a fluid (aqueous humor) that flows throughout your eye. 

This fluid normally drains into the front of the eye (anterior chamber) through tissue (trabecular meshwork) at the angle where the iris and cornea meet.

When fluid is overproduced or the drainage system doesn't work properly, the fluid can't flow out at its normal rate and pressure builds up.

Glaucoma is usually, but not always, the result of abnormally high pressure inside your eye. Over time, the increased pressure can erode your optic nerve tissue, which may lead to vision loss or even blindness. If it’s caught early, you may be able to prevent additional vision loss.

Types of glaucoma are:

Open-angle glaucoma
Angle-closure glaucoma
Normal-tension glaucoma
Pigmentary glaucoma

Dignosis:

The following are checked for diagnosing Glaucoma:

Pressure in eyes
Drainage angle of eyes
Examination of optic nerve for damage
Testing of peripheral side vision
Measurement of optic nerve
thickness of corneaVision loss due to glaucoma can't be recovered.

Prevention:
Get regular eye exams that include measurements of your eye pressure.
If glaucoma is recognized early, vision loss can be slowed or prevented. life.

Treatments for Glaucoma include:

Medicines:

Medicines, in the form of eyedrops or pills, are the most common early treatment for glaucoma. 

Taken regularly, these eyedrops lower eye pressure. Some medicines cause the eye to make less fluid. Others lower pressure by helping fluid drain from the eye.

Laser trabeculoplasty:

Laser trabeculoplasty helps fluid drain out of the eye. Your doctor may suggest this step at any time. In many cases, medicines still need to be taken after the procedure.

If glaucoma is present in both eyes, usually only one eye will be treated at a time. Laser treatments for each eye will be scheduled several days to several weeks apart.

Conventional surgery:
Conventional surgery makes a new opening for the fluid to leave the eye. Conventional surgery often is done after medicines and laser surgery have failed to control pressure