Heart disease describes a range of conditions that affect your heart. Diseases under the heart disease umbrella include blood vessel diseases, such as coronary artery disease; heart rhythm problems (arrhythmias); and heart defects you're born with (congenital heart defects), among others.

The term "heart disease" is often used interchangeably with the term "cardiovascular disease." Cardiovascular disease generally refers to conditions that involve narrowed or blocked blood vessels that can lead to a heart attack, chest pain (angina) or stroke. Other heart conditions, such as those that affect your heart's muscle, valves or rhythm, also are considered forms of heart disease.

Heart disease encompasses a wide range of cardiovascular problems. Several diseases and conditions fall under the umbrella of heart disease. Types of heart disease include:

Arrhythmia: An arrhythmia is a heart rhythm abnormality.
Atherosclerosis: Atherosclerosis is a hardening of the arteries.
Cardiomyopathy: This condition causes the heart’s muscles to harden or grow weak.
Congenital heart defects: Congenital heart defects are heart irregularities that are present at birth.
Coronary artery disease (CAD): CAD is caused by the buildup of plaque in the heart’s arteries. It’s sometimes called ischemic heart disease.
Heart infections: Heart infections may be caused by bacteria, viruses, or parasites.

Many forms of heart disease can be prevented or treated with healthy lifestyle choices.

Cardiovascular disease symptoms may be different for men and women.

Causes:

While cardiovascular disease can refer to different heart or blood vessel problems, the term is often used to mean damage to your heart or blood vessels by atherosclerosis, a buildup of fatty plaques in your arteries. 

Plaque buildup thickens and stiffens artery walls, which can inhibit blood flow through your arteries to your organs and tissues.

Atherosclerosis is also the most common cause of cardiovascular disease. It can be caused by correctable problems, such as an unhealthy diet, lack of exercise, being overweight and smoking

Common causes of abnormal heart rhythms (arrhythmias) or conditions that can lead to arrhythmias include:

Heart defects since birth
Coronary artery disease
High blood pressure
Diabetes
Smoking
Excessive use of alcohol or caffeine
Drug abuse
Stress
Some over-the-counter medications, prescription medications, dietary supplements and herbal remedies
Valvular heart diseasePrevention:

Certain types of heart disease, such as heart defects, can't be prevented. However, you can help prevent many other types of heart disease by making the same lifestyle changes that can improve your heart disease, such as:

Quit smoking
Control other health conditions, such as high blood pressure, high cholesterol and diabetes
Exercise at least 30 minutes a day on most days of the week
Eat a diet that's low in salt and saturated fat
Maintain a healthy weight
Reduce and manage stress
Practice good hygiene

Medications:

ACE Inhibitors
Antiarrhythmics
Beta-Blocker Therapy
Digoxin
Diuretics