Heat stroke, also known as sun stroke, is a type of severe heat illness that results in a body temperature greater than 40.0 °C (104.0 °F) and confusion. Other symptoms include red skin, headache, and dizziness.

Also known as sunstroke, heatstroke is a serious condition and must be considered an emergency.

If the body temperature rises above 40° Celsius, and the body loses the ability to cool down, it is considered to be heatstroke.

If left untreated, damage to internal organs can occur. The longer it is left, the more serious heatstroke can become. In some cases, heatstroke can be fatal.

Heatstroke can be brought on by physical exertion in hot conditions, or simply by being in a hot environment

Symptoms related to heat stroke or heat exhaustion can be very serious. Developing muscle cramping may be the first indication that you are developing a heat-related illness. 

Treating heatstroke centers around bringing body temperature down.

Heatstroke can occur as a result of :

• Exposure to a hot environment.

• In a type of heatstroke, called nonexertional (classic) heatstroke, being in a hot environment leads to a rise in core body temperature. This type of heatstroke typically occurs after exposure to hot, humid weather, especially for prolonged periods. 

• It occurs most often in older adults and in people with chronic illness.

• Strenuous activity. Exertional heatstroke is caused by an increase in core body temperature brought on by intense physical activity in hot weather.

• Anyone exercising or working in hot weather can get exertional heatstroke, but it's most likely to occur if you're not used to high temperatures.Prevention:

Heatstroke is predictable and preventable. 

Wearing excess clothing or clothing that fits tightly won't allow your body to cool properly.

Protect against sunburn. Sunburn affects the body's ability to cool itself, so protect yourself outdoors with a wide-brimmed hat and sunglasses and use a broad-spectrum sunscreen with an SPF of at least 15. 

Drink plenty of fluids. Staying hydrated will help your body sweat and maintain a normal body temperature..

Treatments:

The underlying cause must be removed. Mild hyperthemia caused by exertion on a hot day may be adequately treated through self-care measures, such as increased water consumption and resting in a cool place.

Heat stroke that results from drug exposure requires prompt cessation of that drug, and occasionally the use of other drugs as counter measures. Antipyretics (e.g., acetaminophen, aspirin, other nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) have no role in the treatment of heatstroke because antipyretics interrupt the change in the hypothalamic set point caused by pyrogens; they are not expected to work on a healthy hypothalamus that has been overloaded, as in the case of heatstroke.

In this situation, antipyretics actually may be harmful in patients who develop hepatic, hematologic, and renal complications because they may aggravate bleeding tendencies.

When body temperature is significantly elevated, mechanical cooling methods are used to remove heat and to restore the body's ability to regulate its own temperatures.

Passive cooling techniques, such as resting in a cool, shady area and removing clothing can be applied immediately. Active cooling methods, such as sponging the head, neck, and trunk with cool water, remove heat from the body and thereby speed the body's return to normal temperatures. Drinking water and turning a fan or dehumidifying air conditioning unit on the affected person may improve the effectiveness of the body's evaporative cooling mechanisms (sweating).