Hyperthyroidism is the abnormal function of your thyroid gland, an organ located in the front of your neck that releases hormones to regulate your body's use of energy. In other words, if your thyroid gland is overactive and makes more thyroid hormones than your body needs, it causes hyperthyroidism.

Hyperthyroidism occurs when the thyroid makes too much T4, T3, or both. Diagnosis of overactive thyroid and treatment of the underlying cause can relieve symptoms and prevent complications.

High amounts of T4, T3, or both can cause an excessively high metabolic rate. This is called a hypermetabolic state. When in a hypermetabolic state, you may experience a rapid heart rate, elevated blood pressure, and hand tremors. You may also sweat a lot and develop a low tolerance for heat. Hyperthyroidism can cause more frequent bowel movements, weight loss, and, in women, irregular menstrual cycles.

A variety of conditions can cause hyperthyroidism. Graves' disease, an autoimmune disorder, is the most common cause of hyperthyroidism. It causes antibodies to stimulate the thyroid to secrete too much hormone. Graves’ disease occurs more often in women than in men. It tends to run in families, which suggests a genetic link. You should tell your doctor if your relatives have had the condition.

Other causes of hyperthyroidism include:

Excess iodine, a key ingredient in T4 and T3

Thyroiditis, or inflammation of the thyroid, which causes T4 and T3 to leak out of the gland

Tumors of the ovaries or testes

Benign tumors of the thyroid or pituitary gland

Large amounts of tetraiodothyronine taken through dietary supplements or medication

Diagnosis:

Cholesterol test
T4, free T4, T3 tests
Thyroid stimulating hormone level test
Triglyceride test
Thyroid scan and uptake
Ultrasound
CT or MRI scans
Radio Iodine Uptake test

Physical Exam
Blood Tests
Checking for weight loss
Checking for protruding eyes
Checking for enlarged thyroid gland
Treatment

Several treatments for hyperthyroidism exist. The best approach depends on age, physical condition, the underlying cause of the hyperthyroidism, personal preference and the severity of disorder:

Radioactive iodine. Taken by mouth, radioactive iodine is absorbed by thyroid gland, where it causes the gland to shrink and symptoms to subside, usually within three to six months. Because this treatment causes thyroid activity to slow considerably, causing the thyroid gland to be underactive (hypothyroidism), you may eventually need to take medication every day to replace thyroxine.

Anti-thyroid medications. These medications gradually reduce symptoms of hyperthyroidism by preventing thyroid gland from producing excess amounts of hormones. They include propylthiouracil and methimazole (Tapazole). Both drugs can cause serious liver damage, sometimes leading to death.

Beta blockers. These drugs are commonly used to treat high blood pressure. They won't reduce thyroid levels, but they can reduce a rapid heart rate and help prevent palpitations.

Surgery (thyroidectomy). If patients can't tolerate anti-thyroid drugs and don't want to or can't have radioactive iodine therapy, they may be a candidate for thyroid surgery.
