Jaundice is a condition in which the skin, whites of the eyes and mucous membranes turn yellow because of a high level of bilirubin, a yellow-orange bile pigment. Jaundice has many causes, including hepatitis, gallstones and tumors. In adults, jaundice usually doesn't need to be treated.

The color of the skin and whites of the eyes will vary depending on levels of bilirubin. Bilirubin is a waste material found in the blood. 

Moderate levels lead to a yellow color, while very high levels will appear brown.
An inflamed liver or obstructed bile duct can lead to jaundice, as well as other underlying conditions.

Jaundice forms when there is too much bilirubin in your system. Bilirubin is a yellow pigment that is created by the breakdown of dead red blood cells in the liver. Normally, the liver gets rid of bilirubin along with old red blood cells.

Underlying conditions that may cause jaundice include:

Acute inflammation of the liver: This may impair the ability of the liver to conjugate and secrete bilirubin, resulting in a buildup.

Inflammation of the bile duct: This can prevent the secretion of bile and removal of bilirubin, causing jaundice.

Obstruction of the bile duct: This prevents the liver from disposing of bilirubin.
Hemolytic anemia: The production of bilirubin increases when large quantities of red blood cells are broken down.

Gilbert's syndrome: This is an inherited condition that impairs the ability of enzymes to process the excretion of bile.

Cholestasis: This interrupts the flow of bile from the liver. The bile containing conjugated bilirubin remains in the liver instead of being excreted.

Diagnosis:

The yellowing of skin and eyes are likely to be the main clues a doctor will use before confirming a jaundice diagnosis.

A physical examination will be carried out to look for signs of swelling of the liver and legs, ankles or feet, which might indicate cirrhosis of the liver.Jaundice is treated by managing the underlying cause.

Medication:

Medication or supplements can help jaundice depending on the cause.
Treatment will depend on the underlying cause.

Jaundice treatment targets the cause rather than the jaundice symptoms.

The following treatments are used:

Anemia-induced jaundice may be treated by boosting the amount of iron in the blood by either taking iron supplements or eating more iron-rich foods.
Hepatitis-induced jaundice requires antiviral or steroid medications.
Doctors can treat obstruction-induced jaundice by surgically removing the obstruction.

If the jaundice has been caused by use of a medication, treatment for involves changing to an alternative medication.