Sinusitis is a common condition defined as inflammation of the paranasal sinuses. Sinus cavities produce the mucus that nasal passages need to work effectively. Sinusitis can be acute or chronic. Causes of sinus inflammation include viruses, bacteria, fungi, allergies, and an autoimmune reaction.

The sinuses are small air pockets located behind your forehead, nose, cheekbones, and in between the eyes. The sinuses produce mucus, which is a thin and flowing liquid that protects the body by trapping and moving germs away.

Sometimes, bacteria or allergens can cause too much mucus to form, which blocks the openings of your sinuses.

Excess mucus is common if you have a cold or allergies. This mucus buildup can become thick and encourage bacteria and other germs to build up in your sinus cavity, leading to a bacterial or viral infection. Most sinus infections are viral and go away in a week or two without treatment.

You may be at increased risk of getting sinusitis if you have:

• Hay fever or another allergic condition that affects your sinuses
• A nasal passage abnormality, such as a deviated nasal septum, nasal polyps or tumors
• A medical condition such as cystic fibrosis or an immune system disorder such as HIV/AIDS

Diagnosis:

Redness and swelling of the nasal passages

Purulent (pus like) drainage from the nasal passages (the symptom most likely to clinically diagnose a sinus infection)

Tenderness to percussion (tapping) over the cheeks or forehead region of the sinuses

Swelling about the eyes and cheeks. Prevention :

Take these steps to help reduce your risk of getting acute sinusitis:

Avoid upper respiratory infections. Minimize contact with people who have colds. Wash your hands frequently with soap and water, especially before your meals.

Manage your allergies.

Avoid cigarette smoke and polluted air. Tobacco smoke and other pollutants can irritate and inflame your lungs and nasal passages.

Use a humidifier. If the air in your home is dry, such as it is if you have forced-air heat, adding moisture to the air may help prevent sinusitis. Be sure the humidifier stays clean and free of mold with regular, thorough cleaning.

Treatment :

Using a nasal decongestant spray, such as oxymetazoline, can help relieve sinus infection symptoms short-term.

Other over-the-counter medicines that contain antihistamines and decongestants can help with sinus infections, particularly if you also suffer from allergies.

Medications:

• Sudafed
• Zyrtec
• Allegra
• Claritin